the international court of justice in
the Haag has begun hearing accusations
of genocide brought against Israel by
South Africa and the case could take
years but today South Africa has been
asking the court to order Israel to
immediately halt its military operations
in Gaza the hearings this week will
focus on that request for emergency
measures to be imposed much sooner South
Africa has long supported the
Palestinians linking their struggle to
its own history of fighting a
parthe Israel for its part has strongly
denied the claims are calling the
accusations
baseless Israel says it is doing all it
can to avoid civilian casualties in Gaza
as it responds to hamas's terrorist
attack last
October but South Africa alleges not
only is this
untrue but that Israel's campaign is
targeting
Palestinians with the aim of wiping them
out as a people in its more than 80 page
filing to the world Court in the ha
South Africa
argues acts and omissions by Israel are
genocidal in character as they are
committed with the requisite specific
intent to destroy Palestinians in Gaza
as part of the broader Palestinian
national racial and ethnical group it
goes on to say this constitutes a breach
by Israel of its obligations under the
genocide convention a document drawn up
in 1948 in the aftermath of the
Holocaust which both Israel and South
Africa have
signed Israel though says it has a right
to self-defense after the bloodiest
attack in its
history its officials have reacted with
anger to South Africa's filing pointing
out that Hamas continues to call for the
destruction of the Jewish
State Israel says it will fight back in
the
court the state of Israel will appear
before the international court of
justice at the hag to dispel South
Africa's absurd blood liel how tragic
that the rainbow nation that Prides
itself on fighting racism will be
fighting pro bono for anti-jewish
racists Palestinians in Gaza and the
rest of the world would be looking
closely at the Court's response to South
Africa's
request a provisional ruling could come
within weeks but any final judgment is
expected to take years
and I'd like to get into the details
with Kathleen Powell associate professor
of law at the University of Cape Town as
she's an expert on International
organizations and the interface between
law and politics in the international
Arena perfect person to speak to about
this uh now I understand that you have
been following proceedings in the ha
today do you think that South Africa has
a convincing case
here good afternoon yes I have been
following the proceedings and I also
read the 84-page application that South
Africa sent in in advance and I think it
makes an extremely strong case um and
certainly the legal argument this
morning was superb uh each member of a
very
impressive uh legal team dealt with each
aspect that had to be proven before
South Africa can get provisional
measures indicated against Israel and in
fact it's also asked for some original
measures against itself to stop the
military Onslaught in Gaza to preserve
evidence and to ensure that uh gazin are
given the ability to survive uh in that
food water electricity gets restored and
that medical help and humanitarian Aid
is available let's speak a little bit
more first than about these provisional
measures I understand the icj is
expected to decide within weeks uh
including whether there will be an
emergency suspension of of Israel's
campaign in Gaza what will the court be
basing its decision
on well there four things that the
applicant states of South Africa has to
prove in order to get provisional
measures one is that the court has a
primia case of jurisdiction so not
whether it has jurisdiction per se that
is a decision that gets taken later on
when the merits of the case get get
considered but just that there's a
plausible case it's been made for
jurisdiction that's quite easy in this
case because both South Africa and
Israel are parties to the genocide
convention which gives the icj
jurisdiction if there are disputes about
whether a state is responsible for
genocide so that's quite easy um then
South Africa has to show that it has a
right to bring the case and it's done
this on the basis that it's a party to
the genocide convention and that it has
an obligation under the genocide
convention to prevent genocide not just
not to commit it and it relies there on
the case of Gambia versus Myanmar where
the icj allowed an African state to
bring a genocide case against a state on
another continent So that's its its
second hurdle that it had had to meet
then it had to show that it the subject
matter of its complaint relates to the
genocide convention and it did this by
giving a brief overview of the facts
both the genocidal acts that it's
complaining of so the destruction of
most of Gaza um and the displacement of
85% of its population and then a
separate section on genocidal intent
where it quoted members of the Israeli
government members of the CET people
connected to the military making
statements such as wipe guysa off the
map um if you have an Arab neighbor go
shoot him now so then there was a
section showing that I just want to jump
in there because
that does speak to the wider case
doesn't it this these allegations of
genocidal intent you said they they're
going to be looking at statements from
Israeli politicians uh how else will
they try to make their case
here I think that uh the case is going
to turn on genocidal intent because uh
Israel has already argued that it's
acting in self-defense and you mentioned
that in your introduction to to this
discussion um and although that is a
difficult call to make given how
disproportionate the damage has been in
Gaza um that has been the strongest case
that Israel has made so far but if and
this is what one of the council pointed
out this morning in the in the case
before the hake if the intention behind
all the destruction is not to defend
Israel but to destroy a people in whole
or in part then you've got genocide so I
think a lot of the um the case is going
to Center on genocidal intent that's all
you need for genocide you need the acts
and you need the intention but the
intention is very specific uh and bear
in mind that the intentions got to be to
destroy a group in whole or in part and
that group's got to be defined as
National racial ethnical or religious
and go I'm sorry to jump in because
we're just running out of time but I'm
curious if you could before uh before we
move on um how would you rate their
chances of success in proving
this I think they're very good at
getting provisional measures uh and the
arguments this morning made clear that
the court has granted provisional
measures when the Prejudice that the
that was threatened was being threatened
the harm to human beings was a lot less
than what we're dealing with now so I
was explaining earlier on what the
requirements for provisional measures
are the fourth one is Prejudice and it's
clear from the president from what the
icj has done in the past that it's
prepared to issue provisional measures
when there's a risk of prejudice and in
this particular case you've got the
Prejudice already happening and ongoing
so I think the chances are good whatever
arguments Israel brings tomorrow U may
have a a bearing on the merits of the
case which gets considered later but on
whether you're going to have provisional
measures or not I I think it's unlikely
that Israel can prevent them well thank
you so much for sharing your insights
with us I'm afraid that's all we have
time for for now that's Kathleen Powell
associate professor of law at the
University of Cape
Town and let's get the view from Israel
with DW's correspondent Rebecca ritters
in Jerusalem Rebecca tell us more about
Israel's reaction to South Africa's
claims at the un's top court
today well Israel is obviously going to
get its day in court tomorrow Claire as
we've been hearing to defend uh the
allegations put against it and these are
allegations that Israel vehemently
denies and have vehemently denied uh all
across the board the whole way along
Israel insists that it's acting uh in
self-defense against what it says a
genocidal acts by Hamas carried out on
October 7 uh and in the following days
it insists it maintains that it is doing
everything uh that it can to prevent
civilian casualties and in fact blames
Hamas for the high death toll saying
that the the group are using uh you know
civilians as human shield now just
before South Africa took the stand we
heard from prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu he took to X formerly Twitter
to basically reiterate uh those claims
saying that you know Israel has no
desire to to reoccupy Gaza that it it
has been acting within international law
uh he didn't mention the icj ruling
directly but it was a very significantly
timed statement in the aftermath we
haven't heard any specific statements
from Israel but we know that Israel are
basically called have called South
Africa criminally complicit with Hamas
and they're saying that they're
basically the legal arm of Hamas so you
know some very statements coming from
Israel very clear what their point of
view is there is now it's going to be
very interesting to hear just what the
defense has to say uh tomorrow given the
as you just heard there the very strong
case put forward by South Africa and
looking even a little bit further ahead
I mean we've heard that South Africa is
asking the court to impose these binding
preliminary orders on Israel including a
halt to its operations in Gaza How
likely do you think is is would be to
abide by the icj's
decision that's really really difficult
to predict CLA I mean iccj rulings are
legally binding but they're very very
difficult to enforce they can be ignored
and we saw that with Russia uh in the
case in 2022 when it was the ruling the
icj ruling was for Russia to cease
hostilities in Ukraine now uh that
ruling and the fact that Russia ignored
it showed some of the weaknesses of the
icj and it's for that reason that some
experts are saying that the icj may this
time not take it to that length it may
not go all the way calling for a full
cessation of hostilities that it may
give a more nuanced approach or a more
nuanced ruling calling for more Aid to
be led into Gaza for Israel to hold up
its obligations and that kind of thing
now if that's the ruling we may well see
Israel comply by it but if the ruling is
that that Israel has to completely cease
hostilities you know it's very likely
that Israel could ignore that but it's
just too soon to say Rebecca thank you
so much for that update that's Rebecca
Ritter for us in
Jerusalem and Germany's economy Minister
and vice Chancellor Robert HCK is on a
trip to Israel where he hit back against
the genocide charges that have been
brought by South
Africa my personal and political opinion
is that one can criticize the Israeli
military for using harsh measures in the
Gaza Strip
however that does not constitute
genocide those who would commit genocide
or desire to do so if given the
opportunity are
Hamas the annihilation of the state of
Israel is on their agenda so we can
understand the slogan from The River To
The Sea as not meaning that Jews should
leave Israel by boat but as an
Extinction fantasy accusing Israel of
genocide is a complete Distortion of
victims and perpetrators in my you and
it is just
wrong and Germany's economy Minister and
vice Chancellor Robert habc is on a trip
to Israel where he hit back against the
genocide charges that have been brought
by South
Africa my personal and political opinion
is that one can criticize the Israeli
military for using harsh measures in the
Gaza Strip however that does not
constitute
genocide those who would commit genocide
or desire to do so if given the
opportunity are
Hamas the annihilation of the state of
Israel is on their agenda so we can
understand the slogan from The River To
The Sea as not meaning that Jews should
leave Israel by boat but as an
Extinction fantasy accusing Israel of
genocide is a complete Distortion of
victims and perpetrators in my view and
it is just
wrong